One thing I'm investigating, I'm looking into, trying to develop, is this whole idea that not just the contemporary booksellers, but the real booksellers, they bring an attitude, a scholarly attitude.
Oh, sure, I take it back a step.
Booksellers don't advance universities.
Universities invent booksellers.
It was the European Almagres as a whole that fueled the American universities, that fueled the Almagre booksellers.
The great days of the Almagres, after all, were the days when they were largely selling the libraries, not the individuals.
It was the presence of Christeller.
And today, you know, this is called Christeller.
Okay, that's like saying you don't know George Washington when you're talking about American history.
Paul Oscar Cristela, still alive, age 92.
Yeah, still alive.
Columbia.
Yes.
He's old, well, but he's...
He's quite somehow.
The contact there is Robert Somerville, S-O-M-E-R-V-I-L-L-E.
He's in the book I sponsored that spot.
Somerville is a professor of religion at Columbia, student of Costello.
He's in Columbia, but he looks after him again.
So, Bob Somerville, who's an admirable person, very senior at Columbia.
would be able to say, look, he's too old, he can't do it.
Or, he has good days, maybe.
He's a professor of the Legion at Columbia.
He's in the book Espresso Drespo.
And what areas would this play?
Chris Teller studied Renaissance manuscripts.
He trained, he was a German Armageddon who went to Pisa.
and Hitler got together, he fled and came to this country.
He spent his entire working career at Columbia and he is the best known humanist in this country to a European.
You won't like them.
because their calendars and manuscripts are very difficult.
But he's done some good autobiographical pieces.
There are now, I believe, five test strips.
There are five test strips in Costello's honor, two of which some are related.
The prefaces to those test strips
But it's not just Costello, it's Paul Henry, just to take Columbia, the ones I know, Paul Henry Lang in music, Rudolph Lipkovert in art, Meyer Shapiro in art, it just goes on and on and on.
There's Peter Gay in history, you look around, Leo Gershoy in history.
That generation trained a whole generation of Americans
at a time when our scholarship was pretty bad and universities began becoming the great research universities that they now are and they needed books.
How do you buy German books?
You know, do you get a German bookshelf?
Well, that's exactly what Roger said.
He said, we're not talking about Shakespeare.
I understand that Roger made a statement.
He said, and this is without vile or irony.
He said, it's amazing what we ought to do.
You know, I mean, we wouldn't have certain things as we'd have.
That's right.
We had Santa and our mission.
and a bit of entrepreneurial spirit through a child, and we had the resources.
All you had to do was tell the president of Indiana that Kansas was getting close, and you got a new building, because Kansas' ambition is to be as big as Indiana.
It wouldn't scare Indiana a bit if you said Nebraska was getting close, because the president of Indiana would know that's a lie.
But if you told the president of Indiana they were approaching Illinois,
Now there you've got something.
What would they do as a class of class?
Buy more books.
And you would decide what they needed.
Okay.
At Illinois, before he went on to become president of the Guggenheim, Gordon Ray was provost.
Gordon Ray spent a month in England every year buying English language books for the library as a vacation.
He used to travel with the Cambridge Bibliography of English Literacy, checked off four volumes.
you know, which is a complete list of virtually everything.
And if there wasn't a check mark, and Gordon saw a copy, he bought it.
Unlimited pockets.
And the stuff was thick on the ground, too.
And David Esquin was doing it at Toronto.
The legendary acquisition people who, Lawrence Park Powell, still alive, was doing it at UCLA.
Robert Bosford was doing it at Kansas.
It was the period of the great acquisitions where libraries were doubling every five or six years.
And this is in the immediate aftermath of World War II is, oh, it isn't.
It's after that.
People say that, but it's wrong.
You look at the figures.
It really doesn't start until the late 50s because it took so long to get organized and to get that generation of undergraduates through.
You see, then the baby boom came so that everything was going.
And library acquisitions wrote on that.
That is when he said that there's not enormous growth at the time.
And again, ask Ken and Stubbs about the statistics, which are all published.
The statistics are there.
But you can see the line going on.
And it's hard to pull it directly to these statistics.
I mean, look, they're in about their annuals, I can say.
which for 20 years was a place everybody went for library statistics.
You know, it's a role in every library you're going to go into.
So back to the Rutgers Press, my fortune was to commit this justice just after a few.
I mean, I started the Rutgers Press in 73.
in the early days, in part because there were suddenly no jobs in academia.
And people in the pipeline who had expected to have the teaching careers came to me after they got their doctorates.
At one point, a quarter of my students had doctorates, and about half of them were ABD.
And almost all of them had a second master's before they even came to me, which is so they had a first master's and were about to get a second.
So, when Alex Schreier came to me, she was just finishing.
Dan Traster had his goods free before he came to me.
Sam Stride had gone as far as he was going to go.
Alex is at the Midway, right?
No, she's at the Midway, right?
She's at the Midway.
The name of Merlin, last year.
Very nice one.
I really can get back to Texas.
Very competent.
century English literature Emery.
She's a classy lady, a classy dame.
We're not going to tell her that, are we?
She was married to a very prominent New York lawyer, a partner, Chad Brown Park.
And the two of them own Stillo.
They're no longer married, but still friendly.
They own one of the great private postal collections.
but great, a very serious collector.
Callis is remarried, and so is Les.
But that's where the scholar comes in.
He was Columbia, she was Barnard.
And he went down to Emory as an associate, I'm sorry, went down to Atlanta as an associate.
This is the late 60s, early 70s, and Callis went to school.
That's why she was an Emory doctorate.
That's what wives did.
At least when you're Alice, that's what wives did.
Are there any libraries today that are really building?
Oh, we're all building.
Sure, we all are.
But we're just not doing it in all areas anymore.
Virginia's got the best collection of American literature in the world.
Yeah, okay, but we didn't stop buying American literature.
and aggressively.
We're not buying as much everything else as we used to to support it.
You're not going to see Ellen Dunlap let Americana go by.
They're not breaking Idaho with the enthusiasm they used to.
We're all specializing more, in other words.
We're buying in-depth.
And indeed, I think it's what happens to a collector as he matures, isn't it?
When I started in this business, I bought everything removed.
Now I buy- You made mistakes.
They weren't mistakes, but my mouth is bigger than my stomach.
Now I buy illustrations personally.
And I buy books on the book published before 1915 in mint condition.
Because I want them to do only one- I'm never going to read them.
I want them to do only one thing for me.
I want them to cheer me up when I come home.
If you do that, they'll have to be in perfect condition.
Let's do decoration.
They'll decorate mine.
And my books sing.
You'll clearly see books that you won't believe the condition of.
That's what I want them to do.
And then you'll see that I have it in a dust jar, and you didn't even know there was one.
I might use that quote.
I'm doing a piece with the New York Times.
What I've tried to do here, and that's what all collectors do.
You have to make it far enough
So that your need for books is not outstricted by the availability.
When I see a book, if I see a book at the fair tomorrow that meets my standards and conditions, I'll buy it and I can afford it.
Because I can't buy that much for this collection because I can't get the books.
If my limit was 1945 instead of 1915, then I couldn't afford my own collection because you could buy then 1940s books on books pretty easily.
So how did you select the date 1915?
Well, I know the field pretty well, and I knew that I wanted to spend a couple of thousand bucks a year on the collection.
I didn't want to spend more than others.
And I thought, well, I might be able to do that if it's 1915.
If it were 1900, I couldn't buy anything in that price range almost.
I talked to the author that was her third piece on
I tried to help and gave her some names, and when I saw her drafts, I threw it and her away.
It was terrible, and what was published was terrible.
I mean, look, there are plenty of people out there who know this stuff.
It's not that difficult to find somebody who's got a perfectly respectable piece in this month's issue, the one that just came by Sid Berger on Foreman.
I agree with everything he said.
And that's okay because I've taught format in relation to more people than anybody else who ever lived in this country and still am.
And I get another 30 to 35 people every year.
That's a lot of marbles on the board and I get a new bag every year.
on their advisory board, that's good.
So where's Richard Langdon?
Why does New Rights Board?
He's on their board.
So why don't you send the people they probably know something?
A rumor that is so persistent that I assume it's true, I would be glad you know it's not, that they bought and then killed the English map magazine because they didn't like their advertising rates.
That's news to me.
You might want to explore that.
The map people don't like good ones.
Go ahead.
I won't use it.
It's true.
The president of Boston University, of Boston College, I'm getting started.
a rare book library.
His name I can certainly produce for you through social context.
He had no previous experience in rare books.
None.
He was back on his own computers.
But he had a good line.
I remember that it didn't work out so well.
And Selby Piper, who would know all about this,
discovered that he's another former student of mine, by the way, as is Kimball Higgs, as is Chris Hoover, as is Nieden Mzinski.
You know, it's much of a muchness.
He sent the books personally to Sotheby's for sale and Selby got suspicious and worked it out.
The Rare Book Library went up the river.
How long ago was this?
This must have been Centennial.
Later 80s.
It has to be well after Rare Book School because the guy attended a Rare Book School course and indeed was legendary.
He didn't want to attend the course.
He wanted to come to New York and play tennis.
He was the only person in the history of Rare Book School.
Fourteen years.
The only person who had an attendance problem.
He would show up an hour late in the tennis courts.
I've got it in trial.
Well, look, when he went to the big house, I figured he probably wasn't going to cross my path again.
He did go to prison.
He went to prison for two years.
Oh, yeah, no.
Mark Hoffman.
I'm sorry?
Mark Hoffman applied for a real good school course and got in.
But he got blown away before...
so we get them all you know i have an authentic often signature justin says it's one of the rare real ones he applied for schiller's children's course of course but too late it's got 300 people every year now mind you 50 percent of them are repeat offenders
not from last year about a third of the people this year will be there will have been there last year as well but about half of them even though before and the average faculty member who is not who is not new this year is coming back for their seventh or eighth time so it's a you know it's a loyal buyer and look i mean it's a cricket game but it's the only one i've had
when somebody prepared to find you 12 students of the year on medieval and early Renaissance book writing structure, and it's symbiosis with a vengeance.
I think most of us would agree he knows more about 15th century physiography than anybody else in this country.
But Paul's, for some reason,
Where else is he going to teach good people for a week, which is about what he can spare?
And if you take a medium's course, if you're a librarian or a bookseller, because you want to buy an acquaintance with him.
Because how do you meet him?
And it's, you know, I mean, all of his offenders either.
How the hell do you meet the vice president of Sotheby's if you're a rare book librarian in Kansas?
Thank you very much.
But at their book school, the classes are limited to 12 people.
And you're in a room with Paul Needham and 10 other people for 30 hours, six hours a day.
And because it's Charlottesville and things are quiet in the summer, you're probably having lunch with half your class and dinner with the other half for the lunch.
so that you get, that's why you really ought to see rare books go to appreciate it, you get these pure street farewells at the end of the week that are remarkable because it costs bonds.
And along about Wednesday lunchtime they start lock-stepping through life together.
Because there you are, you know, the rare book library in Kansas, you want to find rare book librarians.
The rest of the stock by and large beats you.
It's open 114 hours a week.
There are 16 reference librarians, and there can be six people waiting for their services, each one.
If there were five fewer rare book librarians, there could be two more reference librarians, and that would help the community at large.
The typical reference librarian in Kansas, and I'm not making this up, I'm taking a specific example, who told me this.
shifted out of reference to rare books.
And the colleagues felt that he had betrayed them because he was needed where he was.
There was a job freeze on it.
He couldn't be replaced.
Suddenly he's in a place that has fewer readers in a week than they have in an hour.
It's 9 to 5, Monday through Friday and Saturday morning.
of its quaint and old wood and quiet.
So, his name is Robert Melton, former student of mine.
He has an interest for the safety argument in 19th century bindings.
He comes out of
environment where at best it's a genial indifference and at worst active hostility with a specialty of a subject in which nobody at Kansas is interested at all or even believes in.
Suddenly he's into a book school with 11 other students who've traveled up to 3,000 miles.
We take the course and we feel not only the world's greatest authority, but the world's only authority on the subject, Sue Allen.
Well, what happens in the class on Wednesday lunchtime?
It's like a bunch of asparagus.
They even start looking alike.
And they send each other Christmas cards.
They send each other the class pictures.
It's like summer camp.
Oh, you betcha.
There's a history-conscious place.
It's a little conservative.
It's got a great rare book library.
It's a place people want to come visit.
You know, it's on University of the First Class.
What it doesn't do is size and focus.
I'm Harvard, Columbia, Chicago, Berkeley, Stanford.
These are universities of the first class.
Primarily the first, with a trophy undergraduate collection.
Virginia is university of the second class.
Its primary emphasis is undergraduate education, although it has very fine graduate schools, but they're smaller.
But it is a first grade university of the second class.
I spent 29 years at a second grade institution of the first class.
And that was a very lowering effect over time.
Columbia's strategy these days seems to me to be to get worse as slowly as possible.
And that's not a very attractive group that
because everything in New York costs three times as much to do as it does anywhere else.
It costs three times as much to build a building, to maintain it, or to do anything to it.
And they'll have the habit of a year endowment over the long haul, in other words.
They can't compete because it's too expensive for them to do business.
And the only way institutions in New York, to my mind, can compete is to have a ferocious preoccupation with excellence.
The MAP, all of the MAPs compete for that reason, because they're very, very good.
Rockefeller University competes, along the way, survives.
They're very good.
They've done a lot of research.
They've lasted a long time.
I like it getting a lot better.
I think it's perfect for what they're doing.
I'm a university professor.
I report to the president.
I have no fixed duties.
I can teach in any department that will ask me.
The dome room is my exhibition space.
I put students up on the lawn, as you saw.
That's why I say, the offense of the Book Arts Press is important to the well-being of the Book Arts Press, but the University of Virginia is indispensable.
Now, there would be other places maybe if it didn't work out, but it does.
I'm looking beyond your own stewardship in the Book Arts Press.
Do you think this is something that it was?
Well, that's always the question, isn't it?
Who knows?
I've got a board.
You know them all.
Martin Antonetti, Alan Dunlap, Nicholas Picklery.
Captain Morgan, you have a program at East University of Virginia with local contact.
James Davis, Warburg Southern UCLA, Warburg School staff contact, Nicholas Dickward, Warburg School faculty contact, Martin Antonetti, former student, Don Dunlap, Big Shot in the Big World, and one other whom you wouldn't know, who's a New York TV director and producer.
The logic of this explains itself.
What I'm mostly concerned with at this point is that if I get run over by a bus,
The assets of the press are owned by the trustees, are owned by the board of directors, not by the university.
They will then, and they all know this, they will then go into negotiation with the university.
If the university will replace me, then the Book Arts Press will stay in Virginia.
If the university does not wish to replace me at their expense, then they will take the assets of the Book Arts Press
which, yeah, but more importantly, thanks to my unfortunate demise, my personal estate, which is large enough to be interesting, can negotiate with whoever wants your book school and a book arts class.
So as a stopgast, this is not a permanent solution.
I don't want to get run over.
My question is,
I've had a board, I've had a do-nothing board.
It's about to become a do-something board.
And it's now actually going to need formally to advise me annually, augmented by five additional advisors.
Kathy Leib, Bill Barlow,
Bill Joyce, and two other seasons, I'd have to look at the list to remember.
It's not on my mind at the moment.
I don't want a wealth board to go, that's not an absolutely inconsiderable bunch.
Or I want a wisdom board at this point.
I can raise money, that's not what I want them for.
I want them to keep me alive, to the extent that I'm willing to do at least.
Kathy, this is, I'm sure you know this, this is a book of very old, very good friends.
I can't believe it's four days over now, literally.
I've known her and Dan intimately for more than 20 years.
His collection of Orwells on loan to me at the moment is in the Rotunda.
The show that was here but with major changes is now called
Did you walk by your show here at least?
Well, in the traditional version it's called Normal Stories Don't Sell in America, Mr. Orwell.
George Orwell and his publishers.
And it's about George Orwell's attempt to get published, which is almost what The Glowier Show was about.
It's a better show now.
The catalog comes out next week a little late.
Dan Leib, if I suddenly discovered his first generation German, I didn't know.
He came over as a kid.
He writes in this book, this stellar writing book, which requires a bit more editing than I expected.
Very good stuff, but compare what he wrote in the Orwell catalog we've got with similar but quite different things than you get mine.
He was assistant director of Irving School in 1983, associate director in 8489, and acting director in 89.
I visited him in Oregon.
I visited him in Mills.
I was an enthusiastic promoter with him for the gallery of golf.
I've done it for a long time.
And this, I suppose, is what gets me up in the morning at the moment.
I have 25 years of this.
And they're wonderful people.
I've known Ellen Dunlap since the early 70s.
Had a lot to do with their getting the Rosenbach job.
Unfortunately, I pushed hard for it when one of the members of the search committee was the member of the search committee who didn't want it.
That was Rocky Steinhower, who had another 10.
Rocky had another 10 of us.
It was Kevin Garganino.
who's now gone to the Wisconsin Historical Society and served.
That's going to be one of the great jobs in the United States.
It's a little world.
It's a little competition with rare book schools.
The railroad school is bigger, considerably bigger than all the other, literally than all the other continuing education opportunities in Railbrook's put together.
Much bigger.
That includes the Railbrook Street Conference, the Steinhauer's Dartmouth Program, the Indiana Lilly Library Program, the Jake Charnowski's Denver Program.
I mean, Jake has 80 people for five days.
I'm 300 people for five days.
The Rare Booksmith conference is 200 people for three days.
So that it all, it comes together a lot and you just, Rare Booksmith is genuinely excited.
You want to know a question, you just wait for morning coffee.
And in week four this summer, Nicholas Picklow and Nicholas Paul and Chris Clarkson and Paul Needham are all teaching the same week.
You've got a question about a real binding?
No, I mean, it's really exciting when the three of them get together.
Do you try to attend as many of these?
Well, I don't ever attend any because I teach three weeks out of four myself.
But a good thing, too, because my classes produce just about 20% of the gross of their book school.
And since I don't cost the school anything, I mean, on the different speech, I'm 20% of the gross than their book school would fold if I didn't.
So I teach book collecting with Bill Barlow, and book illustrations by myself, and descriptive bibliography with somebody.
It used to be David Ferris, now a speech at Noble.
And because the one class in Red Book School we allowed to grow, as big as it was, does big, can go up to 40 people, it has an immense income potential.
Because it's basically a bunch of lab instructors and students.
So if every three students hire a lab instructor, and they do format and play in a pile of books, then go have a lab session, and then just keep doing it.
Should we walk back?
Yeah.
you